---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "AI and Software Engineering: Reflecting on AI in Education"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2023-11-20
published: true
labels:
  - Learning
---

## I. Introduction
The advent of generative AI tools, exemplified by ChatGPT, Bard, and Co-Pilot, has led to both educators and students being forced to reevaluate their approach to education. These tools, with their support of natural language processing and user-friendly interfaces, have made the technology accessible. 

## II. Use of AI in ICS 314

#### Experience Workouts of the Day (WOD)
I used AI with Experience WODs rather sparingly. As these WODs were graded solely based on being attempted, there was no grade based incentive to utilize it. Typically, when faced with a problem I would consult the accompanying video demonstrating the solution. However, on the occasions where I did use ChatGPT, I mostly asked it questions about syntax. An example of this is in E13, when implementing an order interface in JavaScript, I asked how to print a float to 2 decimals.

#### In-class Practice WODs
My use of AI with in-class practice WODs was similar to experience WODs, mainly asking about syntax. An example of this was when building Murphy’s website mockup with bootstrap, I asked about how to add a linebreak.

#### In-class WODs
I utilized ChatGPT much more with in-class WODs due to the fact they were graded and timed. I would often ask it to error check the code and implement solutions to the errors if I was running out of time. I found that it was generally good at error checking, but struggled when in more complex multi-file environments like web development. An example of this was in the WOD using React to implement a page mockup. I was running out of time and asked ChatGPT how to change the text color of specific elements using the .css file. The solution it gave did not work and I ended up having to devise a solution myself.

#### Essays
I didn’t use ChatGPT for any of the essays as I didn’t feel the need to.

#### Final Project
I haven’t used AI with my final project for the course. This is due to the fact that we have built similar websites with a Meteor template in Experience WODs. I have been referring to that material for guidance.

#### Learning Concepts
I have used AI extensively to help me learn new concepts and get a refresher on old ones. I have found this quite helpful and the information provided by ChatGPT has proved accurate so far. An example of this is when I used ChatGPT to get a refresher on version control using GitHub.

#### Answering a Question in Class or in Discord
I have never used AI to answer a question in class or in Discord. It would feel rather disingenuous to use AI to answer someone else’s questions.

#### Asking or Answering a Smart-Question
I have never used AI for this purpose. I could see the use of AI to gather background information to pose a smart-question, but it would have to be a rather niche question. In my experience ChatGPT has been able to answer most questions. I wouldn’t use AI to answer a question as if I didn’t know the answer, there is no way for me to check the AI’s answer without implementing its solution.

#### Coding Example
I’ve never used AI to get general coding examples. I’ve always found asking specific questions more useful.

#### Explaining Code
I’ve also never used AI to explain code. Generally I’ve been able to follow along with WOD videos or documentation. In instances where I have been confused, like with certain areas of a template Meteor implementation, I’ve just traced the code until I understood it. I feel like that is the best way to learn.

#### Writing Code
I have never used AI to write code wholesale, but I have used ChatGPT to edit my code and find solutions to errors as outlined in the in-class WODs section above.

#### Documenting Code
I have never used AI to document code. It never really crossed my mind. I could see it being useful, but I would still have to double check it.

#### Quality Assurance
I have used AI to check code as outlined in the in-class WODs section above.

#### Other Uses
I’ve used AI to generate example data to add to a Mongo database. The data generated by ChatGPT worked well and it saved me time.

## III. Impact on Learning and Understanding
Since I was introduced to ChatGPT in 2022, I have struggled with deciding how much to utilize AI in my educational journey. I found it is far more convenient to ask ChatGPT to explain a concept than it is to find a good article online or to attend a professor’s office hours. This undoubtedly improved my learning process, as it lowered the barrier to obtaining knowledge. However, it also presented the temptation to delegate coding to the AI. I found that ChatGPT was quite good at writing simple code, but it degraded the learning process. I have adopted a nuanced approach, leveraging ChatGPT primarily as an error checker when coding. This entails letting it suggest improvements or identify errors as opposed to writing the whole code outright.

## IV. Practical Applications
AI has found widespread use in real-world software engineering projects. AI has been employed for tasks ranging from data analysis to optimization. In the healthcare industry, AI has been instrumental in [analyzing medical data](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8285156/). It has been able to process large imaging datasets to accurately label features such as cancer. In the future it may also be used as a virtual health assistant, freeing up doctors and nurses from more mundane questions. It is clear that AI is having a major impact on real-world industries and its influence will only continue to grow.

## V. Challenges and Opportunities
One notable challenge for AI within ICS 314 is moderating its use to solve problems. I feel it is important to struggle while learning something new. Often I learn almost as much from wrong solutions as from correct ones. Finding the solution on my own requires me to identify exactly what is causing the problem before I can find the answer. Asking an AI to explain something or point out the error can save a lot of time, but may come at the cost of the journey to find the answer. However, it does provide many more opportunities to ask “dumb” questions without feeling bad.

## VI. Comparative Analysis
From my experience, traditional teaching methods are much less engaging than AI-enhanced approaches. The AI can be used to answer questions in real-time without needing to stop a lecture. It is also more efficient as each student can ask specific questions and are not limited by the number of teachers available. However, it does lack the human dimension and can feel a bit sterile. I think that the format of ICS 314 which often broke the class down into small groups is perfect, as it allows students to go at their own pace with AI and human assistance as needed, while providing a human aspect. AI may have a negative impact on knowledge retention, as it now seems unnecessary to memorize syntax and specific information. Overall, I think that AI assisted learning leads to better practical skill development. It allows students to focus less on rote learning and actually building software and solving problems that arise.

## VII. Future Considerations
It appears that the future will only further integrate AI with programming. Services such as GitHub’s Copilot seek to integrate AI into IDEs making it more accessible while writing code. Soon it may become second nature for developers to utilize AI-powered tools in the coding workflows. Hopefully this will prove to be a symbiotic relationship and won’t lead to sloppy practices or atrophied skills.

## VIII. Conclusion
In conclusion, the integration of generative AI tools in ICS 314 has greatly improved my educational journey. The ability to ask questions and get solid explanations has made it much easier to digest concepts. Learning the ins and outs of how to integrate it into the development process has been quite interesting and will likely be useful in the future. It might be interesting to further integrate AI into the course, using it to generate unit tests or otherwise assist in development.
